Standard for index discovery from ledgers (#106)
dfinity/ICRC: ICRCs/ICRC-106/ICRC-106.md

| Status |
|:------:|
|Draft|

# ICRC-106: Standard for Associating Index Canisters with ICRC-1 Tokens

## 1. Introduction

Wallet applications and token management tools often need to retrieve both token metadata and transaction history for a given principal. However, identifying an associated index canister for ICRC-1 tokens is currently unstandardized, leading to inconsistencies in wallet integrations.

**ICRC-106** introduces a standard approach for:
1. Indicating the presence of an index canister for ICRC-1 tokens through ledger metadata.
2. Defining a minimal interface for the index canister to facilitate querying transaction history in a consistent manner.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

**Which canisters are in scope of this standard?** 

The standard is specifying the behavior of an Index canister. Additionally, it suggests, but does not prescribe, how to design the API of the corresponding Ledger canister.
```

Author: This is more accurate:

Standard **ICRC-106** :
1. Introduces a standard approach for indicating the presence of an index canister for ICRC-1 tokens through ledger metadata.
2. Defines a minimal interface for the associated index canister to facilitate querying transaction history in a consistent manner.

Since the index is not standardized anywhere, here we prescribe the API one should expect, since otherwise discovering the index is not very useful

Reviewer: Thanks, this is better. 

I suppose it's still a bit implicit what canisters are restricted by this standard. 

To make it concrete, which of the following statements would make sense:
1. Our Index complies with ICRC-106, but our Ledger does not support that standard yet.
2. Our Ledger complies with ICRC-106, but our Index does not support that standard yet.
3. We have an ICRC-106-compliant Ledger suite.

record { name = "ICRC-106"; url = "https://github.com/dfinity/ICRC/blob/main/ICRCs/ICRC-106" }
```

Additionally, the ledger MUST provide the following metadata entry retrievable via the `icrc1_metadata` method:

- `icrc106:index_principal` (text): The textual representation of the principal of the associated index canister.

These metadata entries allow clients to discover and interact with the index canister associated with a ledger and can be retrieved using method `icrc1_metadata` defined by the ICRC-1 standard.

Compliant ledgers MUST also implement the following endpoint for programmatically retrieving the index principal:

```candid
icrc106_get_index_principal: () -> (principal) query;
```

The metadata entry `icrc106:index_principal` and the `icrc106_get_index_principal` method MUST provide consistent information. Specifically:

- The `icrc106:index_principal` metadata entry MUST represent the textual form of the principal returned by the `icrc106_get_index_principal` method.  
- The `icrc106_get_index_principal` method MUST return the principal corresponding to the index canister associated with the ledger, as specified in the `icrc106:index_principal` metadata entry.

> This requirement ensures that both mechanisms reliably point to the same index canister. Implementations

Reviewer: Note the unfinished sentence

## 3. Index Canister Interface

> The index canister associated with the ledger SHOULD implement the following minimal Candid interface:

Reviewer: What's the semantic difference between SHOULD and MUST in this document?

Author: MUST is more stringent than SHOULD -- see [RFC2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119)

Reviewer: Thanks!

```candid
type Tokens = nat;

type BlockIndex = nat;

> type SubAccount = blob;

Reviewer: Nit.

In other places, it's spelled like this:

```suggestion
type Subaccount = blob;
```

type Account = record {
    owner: principal;
    subaccount: opt SubAccount;
};

type GetAccountTransactionsArgs = record {
    account: Account;
    start: opt BlockIndex; // The block index of the last transaction seen by the client.
    max_results: nat; // Maximum number of transactions to fetch.
};

type Burn = record {
    from : Account;
    memo : opt vec nat8;

>     created_at_time : opt nat64;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    created_at_timestamp_seconds : opt nat64;
```

Author: same as above

    amount : nat;
    spender : opt Account;
};

type Transfer = record {
    to : Account;

>     fee : opt nat;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    fee : opt Tokens;
```

Author: This change we can do and makes things more readable

    from : Account;
    memo : opt vec nat8;

>     created_at_time : opt nat64;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    created_at_timestamp_seconds : opt nat64;
```

>     amount : nat;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    amount : Tokens;
```

    spender : opt Account;
};

type Approve = record {

>     fee : opt nat;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    fee : opt Tokens;
```

    from : Account;

>     memo : opt vec nat8;

Reviewer: Curious, why not 

```suggestion
    memo : opt blob;
```

>     created_at_time : opt nat64;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    created_at_timestamp_seconds : opt nat64;
```

Author: same as above

>     amount : nat;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    amount : Tokens;
```

>     expected_allowance : opt nat;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    expected_allowance : opt Tokens;
```

>     expires_at : opt nat64;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    expires_at_timestamp_seconds : opt nat64;
```

Author: same as above

    spender : Account;
};

type Transaction = record {
    burn : opt Burn;

>     kind : text;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     kind : text;

Author: Here we're just pinning the current interface of the index canisters, so for completeness we include all of the record fields

>     kind : text;

Reviewer: Understood, thanks

    mint : opt Mint;
    approve : opt Approve;

>     timestamp : nat64;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    timestamp_seconds : nat64;
```

Author: changing name fields in records is a breaking change to we can't do that

    transfer : opt Transfer;
};

type TransactionWithId = record {
    id : BlockIndex;
    transaction : Transaction;
};

> type GetTransactionsResult = variant {

Reviewer: We could make this type support the case when the transactions don't fit into just one Index canister anymore, by returning a callback to the next page. This would be similar to `get_blocks` in the ICRC1 Ledger (https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/dfinity/ic/-/blob/rs/ledger_suite/icrc1/ledger/ledger.did?L415)

Reviewer: I see, sorry I misunderstood that part. 

Please resolve all my comments that cannot be addressed!

    Ok: record {
        balance: Tokens; // Current balance of the account.
        transactions: vec TransactionWithId; // List of transactions.
        oldest_tx_id : opt BlockIndex; // The txid of the oldest transaction the account has.
    };
    Err: record { message: text; };
};

type ListSubaccountsArgs = record {
    owner: principal;
    start: opt SubAccount;
};

type Status = record {
    num_blocks_synced : BlockIndex;
};

> service : {

Reviewer: I wonder what is the reason that some standardized functions are called with the standard in the prefix (e.g., `icrc2_transfer_from`), while others are not.

Probably this is used when it's necessary to disambiguate new functions from priorly existing ones. 

I wonder if it would be a better convention to always have standard functions prefixed with the standard name.

Author: The index interface doesn't follow a standard, so the methods don't have this name spacing

Reviewer: Then I wonder, should there be a note saying explicitly which canisters in the Ledger suite this standard is specifying? I now suppose it's the Ledger itself, and not the Index.

Author: It is specifying the index, but we take the opportunity to partially specify the index canister as well

Reviewer: Added a suggestion: https://github.com/dfinity/ICRC/pull/106/files#r1858260155

>     get_account_transactions: (GetAccountTransactionsArgs) -> (GetTransactionsResult) query;

Reviewer: Nit, would be better for consistency to have

```suggestion
    get_account_transactions: (GetAccountTransactionsArgs) -> (GetAccountTransactionsResult) query;
```

    ledger_id: () -> (principal) query;

>     list_subaccounts : (ListSubaccountsArgs) -> (vec SubAccount) query;

Reviewer: The `ListSubaccountsArgs` type takes `start`, but  how does the client know how to get subsequent pages? I guess they should set `start` to the last value form the privious response. 

Should this be documented in the https://github.com/dfinity/ICRC/blob/43d368ba79d30e850a422fd693b827b528c26ff1/ICRCs/ICRC-106/ICRC-106.md#list_subaccounts section?

Author: Done

- **Input**:
  - `account`: The account (principal and optional subaccount) for which transactions are to be fetched.
  - `start`: *(Optional)* The block index of the most recent transaction the client has already seen. If provided, only transactions with block indices **less than** this value will be returned.
  - `max_results`: The maximum number of transactions to return.
- **Output**:
  - **`Ok`**: Returns a record containing:
    - `balance`: The current token balance of the account.
    - `transactions`: A vector of `TransactionWithId`, each containing:
      - `id`: The block index of the transaction.
      - `transaction`: Details of the transaction (burn, transfer, approval, and timestamp).
    - `oldest_tx_id`: *(Optional)* The block index of the oldest transaction for the account, or `None` if no transactions exist.
- **Typical Use Case**: This method is often used by wallets to display transaction history and update account balances. It also supports paginated transaction retrieval for efficient history browsing.

---

## list_subaccounts
- **Purpose**: Lists all subaccounts associated with a specified principal.
- **Input**:

>   - `owner`: The principal for which to list subaccounts.

Reviewer: Maybe a stupid question, but is exposing all subaccounts of a particular principal always good?

An alternative would be to only allow the owner to lists their own subaccounts.

Author: The subaccounts information is public (and it appears in the ledger) so this is a matter of convenience for wallets

- **Input**: None.
- **Output**: A `Status` record containing:
  - `num_blocks_synced`: The total number of blocks that have been successfully synchronized by the index canister.
- **Typical Use Case**: Used for monitoring the health and synchronization status of the index, this method is helpful for determining whether the index has fully caught up with the ledger and is operational.

## Optional Methods

While the methods defined in this standard are sufficient for compliance with ICRC-106, certain implementations of the index canister may include additional methods to extend functionality. These methods are not required by ICRC-106 but may be present for advanced use cases:

- **`get_blocks`**: Fetches raw block data for a specified range of indices. This is useful for applications requiring detailed historical data.
- **`get_fee_collectors_ranges`**: Provides detailed information about fee collection, including accounts and associated block ranges.
- **`icrc1_balance_of`**: Queries the token balance of specific accounts. This method is commonly used for token management in wallets and tools.

> These methods, while potentially helpful, are outside the scope of ICRC-106 and are not guaranteed to be present in all index canisters. Developers should refer to the documentation of the specific implementation they are working with for details on these optional methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These methods, while potentially helpful, are outside the scope of this standard and are thus not guaranteed to be present in all ICRC-106-compliant index canisters.
```

## 4. Implementation Considerations

Implementers should ensure that:

> - The `icrc106:index_principal` metadata entry accurately reflects the principal of the associated index canister.

Reviewer: This kind of implies that the index should be deployed before the ledger, right?

Just for my understanding.

Author: The metadata could be updated after the index is deployed, at which point the principal of the index would be known, no?

Reviewer: Yes. I'm just pointing out that this requirement would be temporarily violated before both are deployed. 

I don't see any severe practical issues w.r.t. this, though.

- `icrc106:index_principal` (text): The textual representation of the principal of the associated index canister.

These metadata entries allow clients to discover and interact with the index canister associated with a ledger and can be retrieved using method `icrc1_metadata` defined by the ICRC-1 standard.

Compliant ledgers MUST also implement the following endpoint for programmatically retrieving the index principal:

```candid
icrc106_get_index_principal: () -> (principal) query;
```

The metadata entry `icrc106:index_principal` and the `icrc106_get_index_principal` method MUST provide consistent information. Specifically:

- The `icrc106:index_principal` metadata entry MUST represent the textual form of the principal returned by the `icrc106_get_index_principal` method.  
- The `icrc106_get_index_principal` method MUST return the principal corresponding to the index canister associated with the ledger, as specified in the `icrc106:index_principal` metadata entry.

This requirement ensures that both mechanisms reliably point to the same index canister.

## 3. Index Canister Interface

> The index canister associated with the ledger SHOULD implement the following minimal Candid interface:

Reviewer 2: for me it's a bit confusing that we're saying the index `SHOULD` implement the candid interface, but then further down suggest that they are definitely there and somehow part of this standard

> The index canister provides methods to facilitate querying of transaction history and metadata associated with accounts. Below is a description of the relevant methods specified in this standard, including their purpose, input, output, and typical use case.

> While the methods defined in this standard are sufficient for compliance with ICRC-106, certain implementations of the index canister may include additional methods to extend functionality. These methods are not required by ICRC-106 but may be present for advanced use cases:

> - Any changes to the index canister interface should maintain backward compatibility.
>
> By adhering to ICRC-106, ledger canisters provide a standardized mechanism for clients to discover and interact with their associated index canisters, improving integration and user experience within the Internet Computer ecosystem.

why not standardise the index canisters interface first and then how it can be discovered from a ledger?

Author: There's two reasons why we proceed this way:

*  standardized interfaces need to have name spaced methods, so a standardised index interface would have methods like icrc143_get_transactions(). 

* There's many different opinions about index canisters and converging on a standard will take time.  We don't want to postpone adding this metadata until we have a proper standard for index canisters. 

So this standard, which we don't plan to vote on really plays the role of documentation for: discovering the current index & the relevant part of the API of the current index.

Reviewer 2: Ok, that makes sense. I would still try to change the wording in the current standard to avoid giving the impression there is some sort of standardised interface when in reality there is not. 

> Below is a description of the relevant methods specified in this standard [...]

> While the methods defined in this standard are sufficient for compliance with ICRC-106 [...]

> By adhering to ICRC-106, ledger canisters provide a standardized mechanism for clients to discover and interact with their associated index canisters [...]

Reviewer 2: Maybe also make it explicit that the interface of the index is subject to further discussions and another ICRC

Author: Thanks for the suggestion @letmejustputthishere. I've added something along these lines in the introduction of the standard.
